 Hello, and welcome to our lecture on computer architecture.
 Now, to some degree, that might seem like a contradiction in terms,
 because the whole name of the course is computer architecture.
 But we're kind of at the point where we have gotten to
 the level where we've built up
 enough basic stuff to really start talking about computer architecture,
 like what's a central processing unit?
 We know what gates are.
 We're going to start with the gates,
 we're not going to worry about transistors,
 we're not going to worry about tubes,
 we're not going to worry about slide rules,
 and then we're going to just go from there.
 Actually, for me, this phase is a little more comfortable.
 I was never a computer engineer or electrical engineer,
 and I understand transistors.
 So that first half was fun for me to do a bunch of research for you and share with
 you what I thought was important about transistors and tubes, etc.
 But now we're going to start with gates.
 What can we do with an AND gate,
 an OR gate, NOT gate, exclusive OR, etc.
 First, we're going to learn how to start adding numbers,
 because calculation and multiplication in addition are important.
 We're going to learn about full adders and half adders.
 We have to learn about number representation.
 How do computers represent numbers?
 Base 2, base 10, and hexadecimal.
 Then we're going to figure out how we actually store data.
 Using gates to store data,
 we'll learn about latches and flip-flops.
 Once we start getting larger and more complicated circuits,
 we're starting to talk about delay and speed and clock rate and all those things.
 Then we'll start thinking about how you build
 a computer that can execute programs, machine code,
 where you write software in zeros and ones.
 Then ultimately, we'll take a look at how CPUs are put together,
 the architecture of CPUs.
 We often start with computer architecture to talk about the whole computer,
 like there's things like motherboards.
 Let me give you a close-up view of a motherboard.
 But actually, this really isn't just any old motherboard.
 When I started teaching programming back in 2008,
 this was the motherboard that I would pass around the class.
 This is from a desktop computer.
 It's, I think it's probably like a 300 megahertz computer,
 which is really slow.
 I also passed around the CPU that went to this.
 So there's the CPU that went to this particular computer.
 I passed it around the class because I wanted people to feel,
 I wanted them to feel the wires that come out of
 these things to get a sense of this is all very electrical.
 I've been talking from the beginning of
 the course to the level of this is all very electrical.
 So if you look at the back of this,
 there are little tiny wires,
 many of them going on like little streets and chips are
 like buildings that are in a neighborhood and the wires go between them.
 The other thing I wanted people to do is pass this around,
 because you can't feel it here,
 but these are pointy little things where
 the chips and connectors come through the board,
 and they're soldered together and that's where
 these connectors are connecting to these wires.
 So I just wanted people to get a sense that inside of a computer,
 there was something, and it was physical,
 and it was a thing like a CPU.
 The CPU has little pins on it,
 and I wanted people to touch the pins.
 You can see many people over the years have touched these pins,
 and they're all bent up.
 So here, I used to pass around this memory chip, and again,
 this is all from 2008 so that people could get
 a physical feeling of what was inside of computers doing all of this work.
 So generally, if you think about all those wires,
 they generally are taking a zero or a one back and forth,
 and that's what we like about gates,
 and gates simplify the analogness of
 all circuits and make it so that we can think of them digitally.
 So this is a slide from a lecture that I created in 2008,
 where I basically said this is what a computer does.
 It has a central processing unit which processes instructions.
 It has main memory,
 which is where the instructions and data are stored.
 It has secondary memory,
 which is like disk drives where you save files and load data, etc.
 Databases live on disk drives and then put output devices
 like keyboards and mice and things like that.
 So the definitions that I used back then were,
 a central processing unit runs the program,
 the CPU is programmed physically to wonder what to do next.
 It's not really smart,
 but it is very, very fast and we program it to be smart.
 Input devices like keyboard, mouse, and touchscreen.
 Output devices like the screen, speakers, printer,
 DVD burner, or whatever.
 Main memory is small, fast,
 temporary storage and secondary memory is the larger,
 more permanent storage that you can power cycle and not come off.
 So this notion that central processing units are built to think about what next,
 means that we are inside the computer.
 When we write software,
 we live in the main memory of the computer and
 our instructions feed the what next, the CPU.
 We'll see toward the end,
 we'll understand what the fetch execute cycle,
 which is fetch, what is it I'm supposed to do next?
 I did that and I'll grab the next one.
 That's the fetch execute cycle.
 Now we can program this in something like say Python,
 but really it's not.
 It's really programmed in machine language,
 which is zeros and ones.
 By the end of this lecture and the beginning of the next lecture,
 you will be programming in zeros and ones.
 Believe me, this one is a little difficult,
 so you just take your time and follow along with how this goes.
 So from the last lecture,
 we really saw the growth of transistors where we had
 16 transistors on a little tiny circuit to
 laying out hundreds and millions and billions of transistors on little tiny chips.
 So with that, we can create increasingly complicated processes.
 Now the way this design process usually works,
 and we did VLSI layout in the previous lectures,
 we tend not to do VLSI layout for modern computers.
 We tend to build reusable components like an adder or a latch or something like that,
 and then we wire those all together,
 and then software takes our abstract design of gates and latches
 that think in terms of zeros and ones,
 and components like adders and multipliers and ripple carry adders, etc.,
 and then turn that into a transistor layout.
 Some of the things that CPUs do are so important,
 like adding and multiplying and little caches and registers,
 that we might tune the hardware layout in the transistors a little bit,
 but in general, software does all of the work and takes
 our abstract design and turns it into an optimal layout for our chip.
 Then of course, we use photolithography.
 So up next, we're going to talk about how we use gates to add numbers.
 Again, going to the point where we have gates,
 now how can we construct multiple gate circuits that
 accomplish the kinds of things that microprocessors want to do.
 [MUSIC]
