 So you just finished some in-depth work on a 6502 CPU emulator.
 Now you might think that the only reason we ever use CPU emulators are for learning.
 And they're great for learning, right? So I can give you a screen, and it has a program counter,
 and a Z flag, and an N flag, and instruction memory, and you can go change the instruction memory,
 you can start it, you can stop it, it prints a lot of stuff out.
 You can hover over an instruction, and it shows you what the instruction is,
 and what the ASCII character might be stored there, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
 It keeps it really simple, so we can write pretty small programs.
 We can also look at the emulator code itself, and I've got in the upper corner a
 URL that is the actual machine code emulator that's running when you're doing your assignments,
 or just playing with it. So if you go look at that, it's JavaScript,
 and you've learned JavaScript, and it has to run in the browser.
 So I have implemented a 6502 instruction set in JavaScript in a browser.
 The core of this is a function called execute_step, which should be called like
 fetch_execute_cycle, because what it really does is it's going to run one instruction.
 So which instruction is it going to run? Well, you can see in that first line,
 it's going to look at this.cpu.pc, the program counter.
 Where are the instructions? Well, they're in an array.
 So we're going to use the PC to look up the instruction in the array.
 What's the instruction? It's an integer from 0 through 255.
 It's a single 8-bit number. And so the next thing it's going to do is
 have a big long if-then-else with like 40 or 50 different instructions.
 The first instruction it checks to see is if we got all zeros.
 Well, the 000 instruction is the break, the halt.
 And so what happens is the emulator prints the output from the data memory,
 and then it sets itself to not running, and then the fetch_execute_cycle stops.
 And there's a bunch more else, else, else, else.
 If it doesn't find an instruction that it understands, it has one last else
 that blows up and sets it to running equals false.
 You might just go have some fun and see if you can figure out a bit pattern
 that will cause the emulator to blow up with an unknown instruction.
 And after we've processed one instruction, well, we advance the program counter.
 It's what we do with the fetch_execute_cycle.
 Now, if there was a jump, if one of those instructions was jump instruction,
 it already changed the PC. Do you remember how I told you that
 a jump instruction is kind of like a load into the PC?
 It's almost like a load immediate into the PC.
 So that code up in the instruction processing sets the PC increment to 0
 to indicate that it's already been changed to a completely new location by a jump.
 So if the PC increment is greater than 0, we simply say add the PC increment.
 That little mask is there to make sure it doesn't get bigger than 256
 because there's only 256 instructions in the instruction memory.
 And the PC increment is going to either be 1 if it's an 8-bit instruction
 or 2 if it's a 16-bit instruction.
 Digging a little more deeply into some of those else-if, else-if, else-if, else-ifs,
 you can see the load accumulator immediate instruction.
 It's a 0x89.
 And what we do is we say, oh, let's get that immediate value.
 Take that CPU instructions and go 1 beyond the PC and grab it.
 So that's the number that we're loading.
 And what do we do?
 Well, we take the immediate value and we put it in the accumulator.
 And every time you change the accumulator, you've got to update the Z and the N flags.
 So we've got a function to do that.
 And then we say, hey, this was a 16-bit instruction.
 Increment the PC by 2.
 Subtract immediate.
 Again, we grab the immediate, which is the immediately following after the program counter.
 We compute the difference.
 And then we set the accumulator to be the difference.
 Update the status flags because we changed the accumulator and set the PC increment to 2.
 And we do like something a little more complex,
 which is a load with an address and an offset by the X register.
 Again, the base address is an immediate.
 So we go 1 beyond the program counter and grab that.
 Then we grab the X register.
 Make sure it's a number, not a string.
 That's probably just conservative programming.
 Then we take the base address plus the X value.
 That's our offsetting to our index by X.
 And then we go grab the real memory, CPU.memory of the effective address.
 What is memory?
 Here's a 256-byte array.
 And then we set the accumulator to whatever came out of that memory.
 And we update the status flags and we set the P increment to 2.
 So again, this is about 1300 lines of code.
 I would not claim it's a perfect emulator.
 I just did it well enough to make it so that you can learn what you need to learn in this class.
 I would say probably I could make it a lot more accurate if I made it
 2500 lines of code.
 If I did things like made all the memory mapping for sound and stuff work,
 it'd probably be three or four times larger, maybe 5000 lines of code.
 That's not a lot of code.
 The interesting thing is that most modern processors on phones and computers
 are so fast that even if we're writing something in JavaScript
 that's emulating historical machine code,
 it can do that far faster than the original hardware.
 So if you build an emulator for a 6502 and you want to do 1 MHz,
 well, you probably will have to slow it down.
 And things like graphics are way better in modern environments
 and they don't take a lot of resources.
 So if we go back to the 70s and the 80s,
 people would buy things like Atari 2600s and play them on their televisions.
 They would have these plug-in ROM modules that had the code in it.
 That's the machine code.
 And so there's an effort to capture these
 and you can actually disassemble these.
 ROMs are things you can read with ROM readers
 and then you can extract the machine code
 and then you can build an emulator
 and it turns out that the Atari 2600 has a 6502 in it.
 So the console that you plugged into the Atari 2600,
 that machine code is 6502 machine code.
 So you build an emulator including all the graphics capabilities of the 2600
 and so you can emulate a game like Space Invaders on the Atari 2600
 in your browsers and completely play it.
 I encourage you to go ahead and play it.
 If you slow down the startup,
 once things get cached in your browsers,
 this screen goes by so fast you won't even see it.
 I had to record it to catch it.
 You can see what's going on as the game is being loaded.
 It's looking at the files,
 it's the machine code for the game
 and it's running it in the browser
 using a piece of software written in WASM.
 Now it's not written in JavaScript, it's written in WASM.
 What is WASM?
 WASM is Web Assembly.
 So I built a machine language emulator in JavaScript that you were using
 but there is a low-level high-performance machine language emulator
 built into web browsers,
 recent web browsers called Web Assembly.
 So Web Assembly is a machine code
 that is not intended to be built in hardware
 but intended to be emulated very, very rapidly by hardware.
 So for a wide range of software,
 you can do surprisingly complex things
 and then compile them to WASM,
 download them into a browser
 and run them in a browser
 with a little JavaScript library
 that provides things like file opening, et cetera, et cetera.
 Now I want to show you a bit of WASM.
 It's got a little bit different syntax than most assembly languages
 but it still is a very succinct
 one-to-one correspondence to binary machine code.
 I will also show you in the C Programming for Everybody course
 that I teach at www.ccfree.com,
 the C Playground actually doesn't run the code in the server.
 It compiles C to WASM in the server
 and then runs WASM in the user's browser.
 So you can't run an infinite loop in my C Programming for Everybody course
 and break my server.
 You can write an infinite loop and break your browser
 but that is your browser.
 So let's take a little bit of a look at WebAssembly.
 WASM is a little bit different.
 So you don't see, for example, an accumulator.
 It actually has a stack and it has operands on the stack
 and you put operands on the stack
 and then you operate on the operands of the stack
 and then replace things on the stack.
 It's a very simple execution model
 but it's still very, very low level.
 And what this is, is this is printing Hello World.
 You see this sort of indentation.
 It still is machine code. If you look below,
 there's about 90 bytes of machine code that I dumped
 from this particular bit of code compiled into WASM.
 It uses a little different syntax
 because it really doesn't want to expose labels in WASM.
 It really wants there to be a stack.
 It wants to be a set of nested modules
 and variable scopes and things like that.
 But still it's an assembly language and it is got nesting.
 So you tend not to use labels in the same way
 that we use labels in more traditional assembly language
 and machine language.
 And here is a simple example of a thing.
 You can just go to this website and play with it.
 You can write C code, you hit the run code button.
 It uploads the C code to a server,
 which then compiles it to WASM.
 That takes very little time and it downloads that WASM
 and then it runs that WASM as output and shows the output of it.
 That also means that in that WASM compiler for C,
 there's a whole standard library,
 includes stdio.h and the printf.
 That's been compiled to WASM as well.
 So the WASM you get back from Inscriptum
 is much larger than just a pure WASM bit of code
 because it's compiled the C library as well
 so that you can do things like printf and scanf
 and other kinds of things that you would do in a C application.
 So emulators going forward are so fast and becoming ubiquitous
 that it's kind of foolish to write native code
 for certain things like video games and other things.
 And so the fact that you're playing with an emulator
 going forward in the future,
 you may be writing code for production that runs in an emulator.
 (jazz piano music)
