 Hello, and welcome to another code walkthrough for computer architecture for everybody.
 In this walkthrough we're going to walk through the uppercase converter.
 So what this is, is this is, again, WASM in the JavaScript environment, so its output
 is console.log, and that's about it.
 We're not even taking some input, we're going to hard code our input, and then what we're
 going to do is write a function called make an uppercase copy of the string, okay?
 And so this gives us a little bit more time to take a bit more look at WASM, not that
 I want you to understand or code WASM.
 You may even use AI to help solve this one assignment.
 So you're going to take this uppercase code and you're going to write a lowercase version
 of it.
 So you got to kind of dig through this code and figure out where it's doing the uppercase,
 and then switch it to doing lowercase.
 And it might be a little bit of work, and you might even use AI a little bit to help
 you do this.
 So I'm just going to walk through this code to help you out.
 Our output is going to go to console.log, we're going to create some memory, we're going
 to put a string in there at location zero, and then we're going to make it so JavaScript
 can execute it.
 And so we are going to then say copy and go to uppercase, and we're taking some input
 variables, some making some local variables.
 So this parentheses func, it basically, WASM is a stack-oriented language.
 So when you go into a func, you can think of a new stack frame being created, just like
 you would in any other programming language.
 So in that stack frame, there are variables that belong in that stack frame, and that's
 what we're talking about here.
 And we're setting some values and getting things done.
 And then we have some two instructions, or two instructions that might look a little
 weird to you.
 So this is the block, and so the idea, there are no labels in WASM.
 There are constructs, there is an execution stack.
 And so when you start a block, and we'll go down to the bottom of this block, where's
 the end of the block?
 I think the end of the block is right here.
 Oh wait, oh, I missed it, missed it, come back, come back, okay, I think the end of
 the block is here.
 Yeah, no, the end of the block is here, and this is the end of the loop.
 And so what happens here is the block creates a temporary label that only exists in this
 block, and you can branch to the loop end.
 It doesn't have to be named copy loop end, they just named it copy loop end because that's
 what's going on.
 So if this branch, if true, this is doing a comparison between the character to see
 if it was a zero byte, right?
 And if we hit the zero byte, we're going to exit the loop, and we're going to branch
 to this copy end.
 Now copy end is not the top of this, it is the next statement after the end of the block.
 So when you say branch if copy loop end, you're exiting.
 So branches in WASM are more about exiting where you're at and going to the next place.
 So that branch goes to here, there is no label here.
 So if we were doing this in assembly language, we would put a label here, and we would jump
 to the label.
 We're only allowed to jump out of things or to the top of things, and so that's the way
 we exit it.
 So this is a loop that's reading the data and checking for a zero byte, and if we get
 a zero byte, we're done with the loop.
 So that is a block.
 Block is something that can be exited.
 Think of it from a C perspective and a Python perspective as this is like a break.
 It's a break out of this block.
 BRF, dollar copy loop end, breaks out of the block that has the label dollar copy loop
 end.
 So that is just a way to start a block and get out of the block.
 So that's like a break statement.
 All of the looping in WASM is basically kind of like a wild true loop, both in Python and
 in C. It's like an infinite loop, and all we're doing with this loop statement, it has
 no logic to it.
 It is defining another label.
 This label is only accessible between the beginning and the end of the loop.
 So here is the end of the loop, and we're jumping to the top.
 If you don't have this BR dollar copy underscore loop, it's not going to go back up.
 So the while loop is not automatic.
 You have to do something at the bottom of the loop to go up.
 This is like a continue in either Python or C.
 So continue the loop.
 Go up to the top.
 Now there is no automatic incrementing.
 There is no plus plus in here, no auto ion range of five, nothing.
 You have got to add one to your, yeah, so we're going to add one to our counter.
 They're adding one to the counter with this little for statement bit of code, for instruction
 piece of code.
 So they're doing the plus plus as it were, or advancing the iterator.
 You have to do it in Watt, and you're seeing quickly like, whoa, this is a pain.
 Why isn't there just an increment instruction?
 There isn't.
 There's an add one.
 You put the current value of I on the stack, you put the one on the stack, you add the
 top two items of the stack, and then you set it back into the I variable, and then you
 go up to the top of the loop.
 So this is like an infinite loop, and it goes until at the top, of course, it reads the
 offset piece of the, it takes the, it takes, it doesn't even have an offset lookup.
 6502 had an offset lookup in it, and it says give me the variable and add the I to it.
 It's why you have zero based arrays.
 Add it, and then load that.
 I don't know what this T does, but then we're going to check to see if the character we
 just got is a zero, and then we're going to branch out of the loop.
 And you know, then there are things like, like this dollar char.
 This is a local variable.
 And then when we finally get done with this function, we are going to return at the end
 of the function, and then that's going to kind of clear all that local stuff off the
 stack, the stack frame, and then we're going to go.
 So if we got our main function, and this main function is what is going to be called from
 the JavaScript, so we're going to grab the string, we're going to grab its length, and
 we're going to call the copy and uppercase routine, push some things in and call copy
 and uppercase, and then we're going to print out the output of our function and the length,
 and then we're going to be done.
 Okay?
 So this is, oh, I need to talk about if.
 I didn't talk about if.
 Oh, here we go.
 This is the if.
 So this if looks okay.
 It's got an if then else.
 By the way, there is no LF.
 You just have to keep nesting your else's, else, else, else, else.
 It's like going back 20 years, 30 years.
 Okay.
 If, and then this, checking to see if it's greater, this is really, this is a logic statement.
 We're grabbing the character.
 We're checking to see if it's greater than a lowercase a, or is it greater than lowercase
 a and less than lowercase c, less than or equal to.
 So it's doing a greater than or equal to, and a less than or equal to, and this and
 is taking the two logic results that are sitting on the stack and then being true or false
 based on those two logic results popping it off.
 So it's a stack-oriented computation, and so if this resulted in a true, meaning it's
 greater than or equal to a, and less than or equal to z, if it's true, we're going
 to convert that character by subtracting 32, and then we're going to store it back in.
 And so that is what we're going to do.
 Well, we're going to calculate the character, then we're going to store it here.
 It's just really wordy.
 I mean, a center language seems easier.
 Now, the reality is most browsers don't execute this literally.
 It can, and it's still pretty fast.
 You can execute this with an interpreter and it runs plenty fine, but you can also do what's
 called cross-compiling it into native code.
 The key is that the way it's written, a compiler can verify that this is not like doing naughty
 things.
 It's not like reading memory doesn't belong to it.
 You can't jump to places that don't belong to you.
 You can't execute code.
 There's so many things that stops you from doing, which is that sandboxing thing.
 So we have gone through our loop.
 We've converted all the stuff to uppercase, left the letters that are already uppercase
 alone, and then we print it all out.
 So with all that, let's compile it and run it.
 So remember in this screen, the Watt is being assembled inside the JavaScript.
 This is just a JavaScript button.
 The Watt is being assembled inside the JavaScript and then it is being executed inside the browser
 and the results are coming back to JavaScript.
 And that's it.
 So we got our uppercase and your assignment is to adapt this and adapt it so it does lower
 case.
 It even tells you like, oh, it's a slightly different number.
 Maybe you want to do a different if.
 There you go.
 So it's not trying to make it super hard for you, but you got to dig through here and look
 enough and you'll mess it up and then you just go reload the sample code and then you
 fix it again until when you run it, it says the correct output happens, right?
 So that this could all be lowercase and then you will have passed the autograder.
 Let's go ahead and run the autograder on this.
 It's going to fail.
 It was, you got to keep the original string.
 It compiled it.
 No, it didn't.
 We got the wrong one.
 That's because I didn't change the code.
 So there you go.
 Now that's your job.
 You're going to, you're going to fix that in the autograder.
 Okay.
 So this is a little more detail in the walkthrough where we build a function.
 We talk about the block.
 We talk about how break works, how continue works, and then how if then there is an else,
 but there is no else if.
 And we talked about the stack and stack approach.
 You can talk a bunch to AI about this and learn as much or as little as you want about
 WASM.
 I just wanted to expose you to WASM because it is going to be increasingly important going
 forward when we talk about different kinds of software systems.
 Cheers.
