 Hello and welcome to another walkthrough for computer architecture for everybody.
 In the previous walkthrough we went through a simple sort of Watt/WASM situation where we're
 talking to JavaScript. This is not really C code. It's hello world but it's not C code. This is
 WASM plus being run in a JavaScript context and the hello world is coming out of a console log
 function in JavaScript. I want to shift gears a little bit focusing still again on hello world
 and show you something for another one of my classes, C programming for everybody
 under the write C option. So in this course I have a C auto grader. Right now I'm just using the
 playground. You can write C programs and then compile them. So let's go ahead and write our C
 program. Now I'm going to hit the run code here and you'll see a little spinner going on and there's
 a bunch of work and if you do the view source and you watch the network I'm not going to show you
 the whole network. What you'll see is this C code is being sent up to the cc4e server using a piece
 of software called mscriptum which compiles C code and other things into WASM. Then this environment
 will download the WASM and I've got it watching for a string WASM in the network request and it
 will download that WASM and then it will execute the WASM and it will put the output here. I mean
 I already executed it but I made a change hello world exclamation. So in the next click it is going
 to compile it compile to WASM inside the server download the WASM back into the browser and then
 execute the WASM in JavaScript. So it's going to be sort of boring it's just going to work.
 Watch for the spinner in the middle here there goes to see the spinner was there for just like
 a quarter of a second. I ought to slow it down but it did that and there is this a.out WASM
 and if we take a look at the response yeah it's not going to show it to us because it's kind of
 binary stuff okay. So that was the WASM that came back. Now that WASM executed with a JavaScript
 framework to start that WASM up and then it printed hello world. Now standard io.h is in C printf is
 in the C standard library. So what has nscriptum done? Well what nscriptum has done is it has
 compiled all of the standard libraries into WASM it has compiled our code into WASM it's linked it
 all together and sent down a really big WASM because this #include if you don't see it just
 pulls a file in and so that got compiled into WASM too. So let's take a look at how much WASM
 really came down. So let's take a look here this is a dump of the WASM for hello world and there's
 a lot here but it's not that much right. It's we got let's see three c zero zero hex I don't know
 how big that is but I just scrolled through the whole thing but this is not just my hello world
 code this is hello world plus some of the standard library and some of the standard io.h all compiled
 into WASM. Now this now is self-contained as WASM code ready to run inside of the browser and that's
 of course what happened when it ran in the browser and out came hello world but there's a lot to it
 because we're pulling in the C libraries and converting them to WASM as well. So this is kind
 of an ugly version of it we can take a look at a little prettier version of it by looking at not
 much prettier we can look at the Watt and so we're looking at the Watt here this was written to be
 readable this is the Watt code editor for the hello world that's a pure WASM JavaScript example
 and you can kind of read it and you'll change it in your autograder in a bit. This is more like
 what WASM does because it ran the inscription compiler and produced the WASM and then I converted
 the WASM to Watt so that we could see it and we're not going to change this there's all kinds of
 stuff fd write fd close fd seek that's part of the standard library and you see it's really
 like busy stuff it's calling things and perhaps setting parameters and pushing them on the stack
 and calling them and making functions and uh do we have any loops here let's see if we can get to a
 loop there's a block right there's some there's some blocks there's some loops right and jumps
 and all kinds of stuff this is this is the output of a compiler that is writing to a pseudo machine
 language in Watt so I'll just scroll through this that is a lot of Watt okay and it's not very easy
 to see but it's pretty yummy and delicious to the runtime environment in JavaScript who has built
 an interpreter much like the interpreter we built for the CDC 6504 and it runs that as the
 interpreter okay so the key thing is is that I'm not going to spend a lot of time having you
 kind of learn to code Watt it's not intended for you to code it it's intended for compilers to
 produce it so just imagine that this C program that we're writing is really like a high performance
 maybe a video game shading library or something that would then get compiled into WASM which
 would be super high performant and then that WASM might be recompiled into raw machine language
 by my browser and then it'd be like super fast in the browser and that's the whole that's literally
 the whole point of WASM the WASM is to make it so you can write approaching machine code speed code
 in a portable safe sandboxed way running in the browser under the rules of JavaScript and
 inside that browser you can mix code from many sources and many trust domains and they can't
 harm each other because they're all running in individualized sandboxes okay so I hope that was
 a bit interesting about how we connect C programming and and WASM and how I use it
 in my C programming for everybody course. Cheers!
