 Hello and welcome to another walkthrough for computer architecture for everybody.
 In this walkthrough we are going to talk about WASM and we're going to talk a little bit
 about the hello world code.
 Now the first thing to say is that WASM, now Watt is just a sort of syntax, it's the assembly
 language for the machine language and the first thing to say is that unlike microprocessors
 and assembly language and machine language it was never intended to be handwritten and
 so this is a lot less convenient than even assembly language.
 Its goal is to be sort of verifiable and safe because JavaScript and WASM are intended to
 run with code from many different sources that doesn't necessarily want to trust each
 other or have one piece of code affect the other piece of code.
 So it has this concept of sandboxed execution so that no matter what you do in your little
 sandbox you can take stuff in and give stuff back but in your sandbox you can't sort of
 mess with anybody else's sandbox so there's a goal of isolation.
 So this language is designed for like isolation first.
 It's designed to not allow you to write code that could touch memory that doesn't belong
 to you or anything like that and so it's about this isolation.
 The actual code model, first off you can see that it's very parenthesis based and the parenthesis
 are kind of like curly braces, they're beginnings and ends.
 So what we're looking at is Hello World WASM, it's not C, AI gave me just some simple Hello
 World WASM.
 Now in this case we are using things like console.log from JavaScript and passing into
 that console the log message and the length of the log message.
 So this is code that is expecting to run in a JavaScript environment and that console.log
 will be available to it.
 And so there's an import statement that basically says pull in some code from JavaScript or
 give me access to a log function from console.log function from JavaScript itself.
 We're going to declare that we need some memory, we're going to fill that memory up starting
 at zero with the string Hello World.
 These are actually not zero terminated, this is really a string that's 13 long and you'll
 see this 13 come in in a second and then we're going to make it so that the memory is available
 to the JavaScript that's going to call us.
 And then we have a main function that's going to be called by the JavaScript and we're going
 to call our log function and pass the string and the length of the string and then we're
 going to return 42 even main functions like in C return values and then we're going to
 export the function main and then there's JavaScript that's going to call this function
 main.
 So let's go ahead and compile and run this.
 In this browser there is a full Watt to Wasm compiler and then Wasm to machine code and
 then JavaScript to execute the resulting machine code.
 And here is the actual Wasm.
 So Watt is sort of the assembly language but the ultimate thing is this is just a few bytes
 looks like about 6 times 16 about 100 bytes of character and these are these are kind
 of like machine code but it is interpreted so this is kind of like a byte code in Java
 but it's also intended that it can be just in time compiled into the real machine code
 after validating the safety of it.
 And so we go from the Watt to the Wasm and then we execute this Wasm in JavaScript and
 JavaScript has a Wasm execution environment for it and then the output comes back to JavaScript
 and away we go.
 So that is the hello world simple hello world not a C hello world I'll show you that in
 a bit but a Wasm and JavaScript hello world that does its printing using console.log.
 Cheers.
