 So we're gonna wrap up this section
 talking a little bit more about what we would do
 in order to get the instructions,
 the machine language instructions,
 instead of coming from a little switch
 which is completely fake, but instead coming from the memory.
 And so to do that, we look a little bit more
 into computer architecture.
 We talked before about the ALU,
 the arithmetic and logic unit, as well as the registers.
 So the ALU has like an adder in it,
 maybe a multiplier or a comparison module, all in hardware.
 Then we have registers which have, you know,
 bits in them like numbers and their temporary storage.
 And in addition, we're gonna talk a little more now
 about the logic.
 Now the load and store, the way we're gonna do it
 goes to and from registers for like data memory.
 But for program memory, there's a couple of things
 that the CPU uses to control program memory.
 So one is the PC or program counter register.
 So this is a register that points to the next instruction
 we're supposed to execute.
 So the CPU, when it's ready to execute an instruction,
 it says, oh, the PC tells me where to load it.
 So I'm gonna load that instruction from the memory
 into CIR, current instruction register.
 And that's just some bits, zeros and one.
 And then I mentioned the idea of a decoder.
 And in the previous example, we had some AND gates
 that were in a sense our decoder.
 So when you have a real CPU,
 it has a lot more than two instructions.
 And the decoder is looking at the pattern of bits
 in the instruction, decoding it,
 and then sending logic to the ALU and the registers
 to activate the right thing to get the right thing to happen.
 So maybe we're gonna add two registers together
 and store the result in a different register, okay?
 And the decoder sees that instruction
 that is the add two registers
 and store in another register instruction.
 And then the decoder sees the pattern of that,
 and then it activates the right registers,
 the right arithmetic logic unit,
 and then causes the instruction to happen
 in one or a couple of clock cycles,
 depending on how difficult it is.
 In the previous example, we had like a zero to reset
 and a one to add one every clock cycle.
 So it incremented or it stopped, it went back to zero.
 But in reality, you need a series
 of machine language instructions,
 like set register four to zero,
 compare register four to zero,
 increment register four, decrement register four.
 And so there are binary patterns,
 which are part of the documentation of a microprocessor.
 So if the decode unit looks at 0100 for the instruction,
 it says, oh, that's a zero instruction.
 And then RRR is three bits for a register
 from zero through seven.
 So you're setting register three to zero.
 And so these are just simple patterns,
 and they might seem really complex to you,
 but in some ways, they're actually really easy.
 The number of things you can do
 in this machine language is really limited.
 Now it makes programs a lot more verbose.
 And usually we don't even write the zeros and ones,
 we write this stuff called assembly,
 which we'll talk about coming up.
 Or we write C, which is a higher level language
 that then generates assembly,
 which generates machine language.
 Or we take a language like Python,
 which sort of almost completely separates us
 from the machine language.
 But then Python itself is written in machine language
 so that it's really fast.
 So coming up next, we're going to design
 a very simple central processing unit.
 I call it the CDC 8512, inspired by my first computer,
 the Controlled Data Corporation, CDC 6500.
 It'll have a complete architecture.
 It'll be completely defined.
 It'll have a program counter.
 It'll have an instruction register.
 And we will write real, very small programs
 in CDC 8512 machine code,
 and then run them on an emulator.
 (upbeat music)
 (upbeat music)
