 Hello and welcome to our lecture on the CDC 6504 architecture. So as you'll soon see, this is a
 blend of two names so that I can avoid confusion with the actual processor that you're simulating.
 So the processor that we're simulating is the MOS Technology 6502. There are many microprocessors
 that have deep historical significance. The 6502 is a very significant processor in terms of the
 history of CPU architecture and its evolution. It was launched in 1975 and the key to it was low
 cost of manufacture. It was simple. It only had 4,000 transistors. Remember the Intel 4004 had
 2,300 transistors. This ran into megahertz and they kept the price low at $25. So it just allowed a
 whole series of hobbyist computers like the Apple One. That was a hobbyist computer. And so it sort
 of just opened up a whole bunch of things. And so the problem is that if I name my emulator the 6502
 emulator, it would get lost in all of the confusion. So I changed it to the CDC 6504 to pay homage to
 the first computer that I ever used in the 1970s from Control Data Corporation. I learned Fortran
 on it. I learned assembly language on it. I learned machine language on it. And I have a picture here
 of a running version of this computer at the Living Computer Museum in Seattle, Washington.
 That sadly is now closed after Paul Allen passed away. But I have a video that I will share with
 you that is a video of a running CDC 6500 from a couple of years ago. I further was lucky to meet
 an important influencer in the CDC 6500 history, Nicholas Werth. And he invented Pascal. I used
 Pascal. I supported the Pascal compiler. It was a really important part of my own sort of education
 was to build compilers. And so I'm going to show you an artifact from that time period. So this is
 from-- I don't know if you can see it. Let's see if you can see it here. This is from--
 yeah, there you go. 1980. This was a one-year project in computer science where I--
 this is assembly language from the CDC 6500. This is a compiler and an optimizer. And so it was
 written in Fortran, right? These are line printers. Let's see if I can find something interesting to
 show you with all kinds of documentation. And so we wrote all this stuff in 1979 and 1980. It was
 a two-student project. And I have kept it for all this time. All right, there we go. OK, so that's
 an artifact from the CDC 6500. And again, I named the CDC 6504 just so I had something to search on.
 So this is the architecture of the CDC 6504. And the first thing you have to understand is the
 registers. And when you start using this interactively online, you'll be reading these
 registers. So the most important register, the what next register, is the program counter,
 also known as the PC. As we've seen in some earlier lectures, there's the current instruction
 register, which is important. And it often is not shown on architecture diagrams, even though
 it's very important. The accumulator-- so the CDC 6504 and the 6502 is an accumulator-based system.
 And that's sort of like the most power-- they have one single most powerful register, and that is the
 accumulator. As you do operations, they set flags after every operation so that you can do if tests.
 So was the last result 0? Was the last result negative? It has two more registers that are a
 little less powerful than the accumulator, called the x and y registers. And on the emulator itself
 that I've built, it shows the instructions in base 2, which makes it easier to decode. And the data
 memory will be shown in hex, given that most of the time we're just going to be putting characters
 into the data memory. So we program the CDC 6504 in machine language. And so there's some really
 good documentation that I built with the help of AI. So this is a similar language for the clear
 instruction, clear x, increment x, et cetera, et cetera. So we'll cover these in much more detail.
 So let's start right away with our first program. So you can kind of go back. So our program
 is going to compute 1 plus 1 equals 2 in the x register. So the PC tells the system where to
 retrieve the next instruction from. So when the computer starts before we start it running,
 the PC starts at 0. And so the first instruction is 1110010, which is clearing the x register. Now
 the system starts with 0s in there, but it's probably smart just to clear it anywhere,
 anyway. Then it has two increment instructions. And then it has an all 0s instruction, which says
 stop. OK, so let's walk this through. So when the first execution of the first instruction is done,
 well, that sets the x register to 0. But then the side effect of that is to increment the PC register
 to 1 and then run that instruction. And so when that instruction runs, we increment x. And so you
 can see that x is now incremented to 1. But then once that instruction is run, then it moves to the
 02 instruction. And that is also an increment, which it reads. And then it increments x to 2.
 And then it runs to the last instruction, which is a break. And then that stops our program. So
 it runs, runs three instructions, and then stops. So at this point, you might say to yourself,
 oh, wait a second, this seems familiar. Clearing a register and incrementing a register
 and then stopping, that's something we've done before. Literally, in previous lectures,
 you have built a 02 instruction computer with a latch and an adder and a clock. And so you can say,
 oh, well, what is this? Well, the register is like the latch. The adder is the thing that does the
 increment for us because the latch's output goes into the adder. And we've hard coded a 1 to the
 other input of the adder. And then we have a clock that decides when things are going to run. And
 then we have an instruction, which is either 0 or 1. This is a 1-bit computer, right? And the thing
 that I complained about several times in previous lectures is that it's not reading instructions
 from memory. What we just got done doing is reading instructions from memory. And then there's the
 decode logic, which is always a difficult thing for students to understand, where it is looking
 at literally the bits of the instruction and using AND gates and OR gates, actually enabling or
 disabling parts of the processor. So the increment instruction or the loading into the latch based on
 the clock is turned off based on the instruction. And if you look at the decoding of a typical
 microprocessor, it's like a whole city block, right? And so the instructions in a real computer
 sitting in memory, the decoding has to look at all eight of those bits in our 6502. And it has to
 send all those bits to various places to turn on and off elements of the registers and elements of
 the arithmetic logic unit. And so we had it, this is 8-bit instructions, which means we have a whole
 bunch of things that we can do and control. Now, if you think about it, at this point,
 if you had enough time, you could build a CDC 6504 and manufacturing capability.
 Because if you go to that simple CPU and that simple CPU, the latch, the adder, and the clock
 can be mapped to transistors, because underneath them, they're transistors. And we covered that.
 And then we showed you how to make VLSI logic design where you can lay out in a two-dimensional
 grid different materials that cause transistors, right? And then all you would need is a billion
 dollar personal manufacturing facility to turn those transistor layouts into chips. And then
 you could cut those chips up and then you could manufacture a 6502. Now, the goal of this course
 is not for you to go and build a two billion dollar microprocessor fabrication facility,
 but to understand that really you know the essence of the entire process to build a complex CPU
 and produce it. It's possible, and you understand the basics of it. So up next, we're just going to
 start going into more detail of the entire machine language.
